Added a new Matter west command and a guide for adding a custom cluster to ZCL (#20163)
nrfconnect/sdk-nrf: doc/nrf/protocols/matter/getting_started/adding_clusters.rst

The sensor will periodically generate the simulated temperature sensor value and update the corresponding cluster attributes.
This application will form a Matter device within a Matter network.

> See the :ref:`Custom clusters<ug_matter_creating_accessory_vendor_cluster>` section on how to add a custom cluster to the Matter application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
See the :ref:`Custom clusters <ug_matter_creating_accessory_vendor_cluster>` section on how to add a custom cluster to the Matter application.
```

> In the bottom of the page, you can find the :ref:`guide <ug_matter_creating_accessory_vendor_cluster>` on how to add a custom vendor-specific cluster to the Matter application.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
See the :ref:`Custom clusters<ug_matter_creating_accessory_vendor_cluster>` section on how to add a custom vendor-specific cluster to the Matter application.
```

> In the bottom of the page, you can find the :ref:`guide <ug_matter_creating_accessory_vendor_cluster>` on how to add a custom vendor-specific cluster to the Matter application.

Reviewer 3: I don't know whether we have to mention it's vendor-specific, as custom already covers it's all "customity" .
```suggestion
In the bottom of the page, you can find the :ref:`guide <ug_matter_creating_accessory_vendor_cluster>` on how to add a custom cluster to the Matter application.
```

                     Command that takes two uint8 arguments and returns their sum.
                  </description>
                  <arg name="arg1" type="int8u"/>
                  <arg name="arg2" type="int8u"/>
            </command>
            <event source="server" code="0x01" name="MyEvent" optional="false">
                  <description>
                     Event that is generated by the server.
                  </description>
                  <arg name="arg1" type="int8u"/>
            </event>
         </cluster>
      </configurator>

   For the guide purposes, save this file as :file:`MyCluster.xml` in the sample directory.

#. Add the cluster description file to the data model definition file and run the ZAP tool.

   The data model definition file contains all the cluster XML locations and manufacturers list.
   To work with the new custom cluster, you need to append it to the list in the existing data model definition file.

   You can use the :ref:`ug_matter_gs_tools_matter_west_commands_zap_tool_gui` to add the cluster and run the ZAP tool, or :ref:`ug_matter_gs_tools_matter_west_commands_append` to add the cluster only without starting the ZAP tool.

>    This guide has focus on the :ref:`ug_matter_gs_tools_matter_west_commands_zap_tool_gui` command.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   This guide has focus on the :ref:`ug_matter_gs_tools_matter_west_commands_zap_tool_gui`.
```

#. Read the measurement again.
   The measurement should not change.

.. _ug_matter_creating_accessory_vendor_cluster:

Custom clusters
***************

A custom cluster is a manufacturer-specific cluster that is not defined in the Matter Device Type Library Specification.

> The cluster description is written in XML format and is used to generate the C++ source files that handle the cluster.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The cluster description is written in XML format and is used to generate the C++ source files that provide the cluster implementation.
```

> The cluster can be added to the Matter data model definition file and used in :ref:`ug_matter_gs_tools_zap` to generate the source files.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can add the cluster to the Matter data model definition file and use it in the :ref:`ug_matter_gs_tools_zap` to generate the source files.
```

> To add a vendor-specific cluster to the Matter application, complete the following steps:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To add a custom cluster to the Matter application, complete the following steps:
```

1. Create a new cluster description file in XML format.

   The file should contain cluster definitions, attributes, commands, events, enums, and structs in XML format.
   The cluster ``<code>`` is a 32-bit combination of the manufacturer code and it should be unique and not conflict with existing clusters.
   The most significant 16 bits are the manufacturer code, and the least significant 16 bits are the cluster code.

>    In the example, there is a cluster with the code ``0xFFF11234``, which means ``0xFFF`` is the Test Manufacturer ID, and ``0x1234`` is the cluster ID.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   In the example, there is a cluster with the code ``0xFFF11234``, which means ``0xFFF1`` is the Test Manufacturer ID, and ``0x1234`` is the cluster ID.
```

            <cluster>
               <domain>General</domain>
               <name>MyNewCluster</name>
               <code>0xFFF11234</code>
               <define>MY_NEW_CLUSTER</define>
               <description>The MyNewCluster cluster showcases a cluster manufacturer extensions</description>
               <attribute side="server" code="0x0000" define="FLIP_FLOP" type="boolean" writable="true" default="false" optional="false">MyAttribute</attribute>
               <command source="client" code="0x02" name="MyCommand" response="MyCommandResponse" optional="false">
                     <description>
                        Command that takes two uint8 arguments and returns their sum.
                     </description>
                     <arg name="arg1" type="int8u"/>
                     <arg name="arg2" type="int8u"/>
               </command>
               <event source="server" code="0x01" name="MyEvent" optional="false">
                     <description>
                        Event that is generated by the server.
                     </description>
                     <arg name="arg1" type="int8u"/>
               </event>
            </cluster>

>    ..

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

Author: Hmm, we used to use that `..` after every `tabs`, for example here: https://github.com/nrfconnect/sdk-nrf/blob/main/doc/nrf/protocols/matter/getting_started/hw_requirements.rst?plain=1#L289 Should we keep using it?

Reviewer 2: > Hmm, we used to use that `..` after every `tabs`, for example here: https://github.com/nrfconnect/sdk-nrf/blob/main/doc/nrf/protocols/matter/getting_started/hw_requirements.rst?plain=1#L289 Should we keep using it?

That is not necessary, but does not harm. You can leave it if you like.

   .. note::
      The descriptions of the elements above show only the basic functionality.

>       To see the full list of available elements for each part of the XML file, refer to the Matter Specification.

Reviewer 2: Link to the Matter spec?

Author: It is not so easy. Matter spec can be obtained on a user's request, and it is not visible globally.

>    You can use the following template for the :file:`MyCluster.xml` file, which contains comments to guide you through the process:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   You can use the following template for the :file:`MyCluster.xml` file that contains comments to guide you through the process:
```

                     Command that takes two uint8 arguments and returns their sum.
                  </description>
                  <arg name="arg1" type="int8u"/>
                  <arg name="arg2" type="int8u"/>
            </command>
            <event source="server" code="0x01" name="MyEvent" optional="false">
                  <description>
                     Event that is generated by the server.
                  </description>
                  <arg name="arg1" type="int8u"/>
            </event>
         </cluster>
      </configurator>

   For the guide purposes, save this file as :file:`MyCluster.xml` in the sample directory.

#. Add the cluster description file to the data model definition file and run the ZAP tool.

   The data model definition file contains all the cluster XML locations and manufacturers list.
   To work with the new custom cluster, you need to append it to the list in the existing data model definition file.

   You can use the :ref:`ug_matter_gs_tools_matter_west_commands_zap_tool_gui` to add the cluster and run the ZAP tool, or :ref:`ug_matter_gs_tools_matter_west_commands_append` to add the cluster only without starting the ZAP tool.

>    In this guide, we will focus on the :ref:`ug_matter_gs_tools_matter_west_commands_zap_tool_gui` command.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   This guide has focus on the :ref:`ug_matter_gs_tools_matter_west_commands_zap_tool_gui` command.
```

   Run the following command:

   .. code-block::

      west zap-gui -j ./zcl.json ./MyCluster.xml

   This example command copies the original :file:`<default Matter SDK location>/src/app/zap-templates/zcl/zcl.json` file, adds the :file:`MyCluster.xml` cluster, and saves the new :file:`zcl.json` file in the sample directory.
   The newly generated :file:`zcl.json` file is used as an input to the ZAP tool.

#. Locate the new cluster in the ZAP tool.

   .. figure:: images/matter_create_accessory_custom_cluster.png
      :alt: New custom cluster in ZAP tool

      New custom cluster in ZAP tool

#. Choose whether the cluster should be enabled for the Client and Server sides.

#. Click the gear icon to open the cluster configuration and enable the attributes, commands, and events.

   a. In the :guilabel:`ATTRIBUTES` tab, ensure that you have the required attributes enabled.

      .. figure:: images/matter_create_accessory_custom_cluster_attributes.png
         :alt: Attributes of the new custom cluster in ZAP tool

         Attributes of the new custom cluster in ZAP tool

>    b. In the :guilabel:`COMMANDS` tab, ensure that you have the required commands enabled.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   #. In the :guilabel:`COMMANDS` tab, ensure that you have the required commands enabled.
```

      .. figure:: images/matter_create_accessory_custom_cluster_commands.png
         :alt: Commands of the new custom cluster in ZAP tool

         Commands of the new custom cluster in ZAP tool

>    c. In the :guilabel:`EVENTS` tab, ensure that you have the required events enabled.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   #. In the :guilabel:`EVENTS` tab, ensure that you have the required events enabled.
```

      .. figure:: images/matter_create_accessory_custom_cluster_events.png
         :alt: Events of the new custom cluster in ZAP tool

         Events of the new custom cluster in ZAP tool

#. Save the file and exit.

> #. Use the modified ZAP file to generate the C++ code that contains the selected clusters by running the following command:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#. Run the following command to use the modified ZAP file to generate the C++ code that contains the selected clusters:
```

   .. code-block::

      west zap-generate

After completing these steps, the following changes will be visible within your sample directory:

* The new cluster description file :file:`MyCluster.xml`.
* The updated data model definition file :file:`zcl.json` with the new cluster and relative paths to the Matter data model directory.
* The generated C++ source files for the new cluster.
* The updated :file:`.zap` file with the new cluster configuration and relative path to the :file:`zcl.json` file.

Once the new cluster is added to the Matter application, you can call the ``zap-gui`` command without the additional ``--clusters`` argument.

> However, you still need to provide a path to the :file:`zcl.json` file if you created a new one in a different location than the default one.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
However, you still need to provide the path to the :file:`zcl.json` file if you created a new one in a different location than the default one.
```
